Yes. This is another attempt at criticising that impregnable castle that is Guns, Germs and Steel. The internet is full of reviews, summaries and, of course, those classy threads in Reddit. He has been widely prized, but also criticised in almost all fronts; history, human evolution, geography, and in many cases he seems to have been badly wounded, like in that review of Michael Barratt Brown, or the Mises Institute critical review on what they call Diamond’s pseudo-history. But when it comes to biology, he still stands tall and proud, like the Sphinx at Giza. 
That is why I am still to find a proper critique of Diamond’s chapter on animal domestication. The more I read about the subject, whereas horses or aurochs, the more I find that there seems to be two camps: one completely ignores Diamond, as if avoiding the wrath of a Demigod; the other one cites his books and articles as priests citing Saint Matthew.  
I am not a biologist, which kind of gives me the outsider’s advantage. It also puts me on a blind spot, as most non-specialists can easily get lost in the detail and interpret things in a completely mistaken way. I get that. But not being a biologist also allows me to approach the subject with an unorthodox point of view. I am irresolutely at peace with the prospect of being wrong about animal domestication. Probably Diamond has been right all along and that is why no one challenges his theory of animal domestication. 

Diamond’s thesis about animal domestication is poured in chapter 9 Zebras, Unhappy Marriages, and the Anna Karenina Principle. But before I start talking about the subject proper, I need to say something about the literary analogy. The “Anna Karenina principle” has been used in all sort of situations and it wasn’t invented by Diamond. He may have made it widely popular outside the fenced pastures of literary criticism and other disciplines such as psychology and economics, but it’s definitely not his. I say this because people seem to attribute to Diamond all sort of ideas, when in reality what he has done, very well, is to summarise a huge variety of different ideas and to create a synthesis of what he thinks is the evolution of mankind. Another very popular myth is that he invented the continental axis hypothesis. The first person to mention it was Alfred Crosby in Ecological Imperialism. Crosby did not elaborate a full hypothesis though, and only mentioned the possibility of the north-south axis of the Americas to be one of many reasons for the slow pace of development:

“Why was the New World so tardily civilized? Perhaps because the long axis of the Americas runs north and south, and so the Amerindian food plants on which all New World civilizations depended had to spread through sharply dif­fering climates, unlike the staple crops of the Old World, which by and large spread east and west through regions of roughly similar climates.” (p. 18)

Crosby wrote the above in 1986, almost a decade before Diamond’s first edition of Guns, Germs and Steel. It looks pretty similar to what Diamond proposes, right? What I find dishonest from Diamond is the fact that although he does cite Crosby in his literature, he never says this idea was first proposed by… which is kind of cheeky, to say the least. 

Anyway, Chapter 9. Zebras, Unhappy Marriages, and the Anna Karenina Principle. Diamond presents here fourteen species as the backbone of animal domestication. Nine species are presented as minor, and five species are presented as major. We will focus now on the major ones: Sheep, Goat, Cow, Pig, Horse. These are the five species that have become ubiquitous around the world. The original range of these five species is located in Eurasia and this is very important because we must remember that Europeans, Diamond says Eurasians but he cannot mean anything other than Europeans, came to dominate the world and have guns, germs and steel. Yes, Genghis Khan, Darius and the Ottomans were not Europeans, but neither they arrive in ships to the Americas in 1492, nor created the Portuguese, Spanish, Dutch and British Empires, or gave birth to the United States of America, Australia and New Zealand. A fundamental milestone in the European triumph, or Eurasian if you prefer a more ambiguous term, was the domestication of animals and plants. In the case of plants, humans practically stumbled upon a massive wild granary in the Fertile Crescent as soon as they came out of Africa 40000 years ago. Some may point at the fact that, more precisely, this occurred after the Last Glacial Maxima (LGM), but it seems that the region in point wasn’t affected too much (please forgive my leniency if that wasn’t the case). There really was not much to do, wheat, barley, pulses were all there, not only growing across large expanses, but also being very productive already in their wild forms. It doesn’t come as a surprise then that recent discoveries have pushed back the date of early human use of cereals in the Levant to 23000 years ago, in a site called Abu Hureyra 1 in Syria. Please bear in mind that this doesn’t mean that humans started eating cereals 23000 years ago, it simply means that we know, for certain, that humans were using cereals by then; humans relationship with cereals could be much older, but we have not found evidence of older use, or further evidence from elsewhere to prove that this was the case across a large area in the Levant and the rest of the Fertile Crescent at the same date. As a comparison, the oldest evidence of cereal domestication, that is, people actually growing modern forms of wheat, is 10700 years old in a site called Tell Qarassa North, in southern Syria. 

But animal domestication was different. We are not going to tell the individual story of each species here because neither does Diamond; what matters is what he considers the fundamental characteristics for a species to be domesticated. Here comes the Anna Karenina principle: “Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.” In order to be happy, a marriage needs to succeed in many different respects, says Diamond. He then goes on to explain the characteristics of the Anna Karenina principle when applied to animal domestication:

flexible diet

appropriate growth rate 

successful breeding in captivity 

pleasant disposition towards humans 

steady temperament  

adaptable social hierarchy  

In order to be domesticable, an animal must have all six characteristics. It cannot be fussy with food; it needs to grow fast; it must be able to breed in captivity; it must not panic or get completely infuriated by human presence and, finally, it must have a hierarchical social organisation whereby humans can occupy the vacant place of the alpha male leadership. 

And here my dear readers, is where I think this gets rather tricky. The more I read the above “characteristics”, the more I have a weird feeling about it. Because what Diamond is describing under the banner of the ‘Anna Karenina Principle’ could be the result of thousands of years of selective breeding and not a series of traits shared among some wild animals. This is what I call a classic example of the Hempel’s paradox: ‘A case of a hypothesis supports the hypothesis.’ Yes, the black raven. “All Ravens are black” is equal to “All non-black things are non-ravens” and, therefore, a white shoe provides as much evidence that all ravens are black as a black raven does. 

If we see one black raven, it doesn’t mean that all ravens are black, it simply is a piece of evidence supporting the hypothesis. Likewise, seeing 10000 black ravens still doesn’t prove that all ravens are black; it would only show us that we may be going in the right direction, but is not incontrovertible proof. But what happens if we see a single white raven? Well, we would have found incontrovertible, irrefutable and definite proof that not all ravens are black. 

But a white shoe is another proof that all ravens are black, as all non-black things are non-ravens, right? There are two positions about this; a) a white shoe is a red herring (sensu Wood, 1967); b) a white shoe is not a red herring (sensu Hempel, 1967). Wood argues that the paradoxes of confirmation are spurious on the ground that one of the two assumptions underlying them is false; a white shoe does not represent evidence that all ravens are black. Hempel, on the other hand, argues that objects may have properties that make them confirmatory and disconfirmatory for a given hypothesis. A bird may be a raven and black, but may also have an albino for a sister; it would then prove and disprove the hypothesis that all ravens are black.   

But in following Diamond’s argument, I feel that the best way of explaining my own convoluted argument is by using a literary analogy, as he has done with Tolstoi’s novel. Let’s call it the Chernobyl Principle, based on the HBO’s adaptation of Svetlana Alexievich’s Voices from Chernobyl. In one of the first episodes, a scientist called Valery Legasov is invited to a meeting of the Politburo presided by President Mikhail Gorbachev. Once the politburo has been briefed about the accident at Chernobyl in very rossy terms, Gorbachev adjourns the meeting, but Legasov objects, saying that he’s been worried about the mentions of black debris in the report which he believes is graphite. He also says that he is worried about the 3.6 roentgen radiation measure reported (one of the members of the politburo has liken it to a chest X-ray). As it turns out, the 3.6 roentgen magical number was the result of the low-limit dosimeters maxing out. The radiation was much higher indeed, but “they gave us the number they had.”

The Chernobyl Principle then, would dictate that what you see, does not necessarily equals to what you do not see. Diamond seems to be giving us ‘the number he had’, consciously or otherwise. According to him, Zebras have not been domesticated simply because they have evolved in an ecosystem overcrowded by predators, and therefore have become too aggressive, too twitchy, too suspicious (which, by the way, doesn’t explain the Zebras’ ducking reflex that makes them so good at avoiding the lasso). But what evidence do we have that the wild relative of the horse was not as wild as the zebra? Since the closest wild relatives of the modern horse have no descendants today, Diamond is supporting his characterisation of the horse as an ideal candidate for domestication on the heavily domesticated modern horse, not on historical or archaeological evidence, as the former is non-existent (the domestication of the horse predates writing) and the latter is scant. He basically says that the wild horses that roamed Eurasia’s steppes did not have to constantly deal with and be aware of cheetahs, lions and hyenas as zebras do on a daily basis in Africa; but he also forgets to mention that wild horses did have to contend with the most dangerous predator of all in Eurasia: humans. Since all we see around us are black ravens, we end up assuming that all ravens are black. But this may not have been always the case; maybe we pushed white ravens to extinction because we thought they were a bad omen. 

But let us elaborate further the Chernobyl principle with a more relevant and  appropriate example (we haven’t domesticated ravens after all). Aurochs are the ancestors of modern cattle and, as ancient horses, they went extinct. The big difference is that they lived much longer than horses in the wild and so, there is written evidence of their behaviour from Poland, where they supposedly existed until the High Middle Ages, I say supposedly because there is always the question mark of how wild they were by then. The following descriptions appear in Van Vuure (2005): “An aurochs is not afraid of humans and will not flee when a human being comes near, it will hardly avoid him when he approaches it slowly.” But then, the same author cites other passages from chroniclers where the European bison, held in similar conditions to the Aurochs in Białowieża forest, “does not run from humans; on the contrary, it stops when it is approached, and does not budge; it only attacks man when it is irritated, in which case it is fierce and dangerous.” It seems that both species behaved similarly towards humans. When chased, hunt or confined, they would become timid and shy, avoiding contacts with humans; when left to their own devices, they wouldn’t be afraid of humans. So here we have two species that behave similarly towards humans, eat the same, grow more or less at the same rate (Bisons reach adulthood in 3 years, while cattle does in 2), can breed while in captivity, have a more or less steady temperament (as long as you do not come across as a bull fighter), and have exactly the same social hierarchy. They also seem to adapt quite rapidly to the presence of humans, switching to a different social behaviour if they are chased or hunt. A similar situation has been reported with cattle that has been reintroduced to natural reserves in the Netherlands, Poland, Romania and Spain. European bison can be observed at very close range at Białowieża forest and they seem to behave exactly as they did 500 hundred years ago; if left alone, they would tolerate humans from a safe distance. Why is it then that Aurochs were domesticated but European bison was not if, according to Diamond, any species with the Anna Karenina Principle characteristics can, and has been domesticated? 

